it's early morning and Mandy is boarding
the bus for her regular journey to the
training fields but today she has a big
test ahead to see if she's ready to join
an elite team on a mine clearing mission
to Mozambique in the past dogs have been
used for mine detection but African
pouch rats like Mandy have distinct
advantages rats have some advantages to
dogs that is of course they're smaller
in size they're much cheaper specially
the transport our animals which were
using their the almost blind or they
don't see much for their night animals
so they're completely depending on the
sense of smell and hearing so and if you
look at them they're sniffing all the
time as with the TB training Mandy and
chums have spent several months in
laboratories tuning their noses to the
smell of TNT the explosive in landmines
having completed this stage they put
their nose to the test in the field on a
series of courses designed to stretch
their mind sniffing capabilities we use
three meter and we call it contamination
whereby we use iron and casings so we
put them down in the field they have
three meter wide that's why we call them
three meter then the large one is used
with that system then the latter goes to
five meter the distance from each
landmines is much farther to make the
light work more to get to find the
landmines
they are like humans some of them they
are good some they're not Eagles so
their different capabilities
Mandy is one of the rat schools high
achievers most take about a year to
train but she has made it to the final
test in a mere eight months the other
rats have to do a few hundred square
meters containing let's say five six
seven mines and they're not allowed to
miss one mine and I miss one mine they
can
present mind view today nine real
landmines have been him Mandy will have
to find them with 100% accuracy guided
by a search string which is connected
between the two trainers Mandy moves
systematically up and down the course
processing Lane by laying every time she
snips her mind she scratches the surface
at the spot weighing less than five
kilograms she's too light to set off the
explosive device and when she indicates
a mine she gets what she's in it for a
click followed by a reward with nine
mines to find that's a lot of bananas to
eat and as Mandy's ever-expanding
pouches show she's doing rather well
they work for their foods and they look
a bit mechanical once they know
something they love to repeat it
repeated all the time as long as they
know they're going to get the food and
they're confident they can do the job so
that makes them very well suited for
this job to know
finally when Mandy's cheeks can take no
more banana the test is over she has
passed with flying colors and will head
to Mozambique on a mine clearing mission